+++
title = "You don't have to if you don't want to."
description = 'TODO The description goes here.'
#subheading = 'The subheading goes here.'
date = 2026-02-22

#[[infoBox]]
#key = 'AI Disclosure :sparkles:'
#value = 'Ideally this is not needed.'
+++

I'm sure you're wondering why I called you all here today. Well, to be honest, I didn't actually call for _all_ of you; some of you probably shouldn't be here. You folks might want to quietly find your way to the exits right here and right now.

For those readers who are sticking around, I suspect I'm going to lose a fair number of you along the way. We're going to attempt to thread a pretty tough needle here and I won't be too terribly offended if some browser tabs get closed before we get there.

And hell, may as well say it: The opinions expressed here belong solely to me and do not reflect the views of my employer, and they probably don't reflect the views of anyone else's employer either.

This is for the people who look at the world and feel like everything and everybody has gone crazy. People who maybe have this nagging feeling deep inside that something isn't right here, but may be unsure about speaking up for fear of being ostracized at work or in social circles. Those of us who pause, look at this barrage of everything happening around us every day, and simply want to say no.

If anyone out there has felt for the very first time that this might finally be the new trick that makes them feel like an old dog, or if you're a fresh graduate who spent years working through school toward an almost-certain career path that seems now to be crumbling into dust underfoot, you are the intended audience.

I'm writing this to tell you that it's not just you. But more importantly, you're not wrong. You are free to feel what you feel and think what you think. And I, for one, am tired of listening to people that tell me to suppress those parts of myself and surrender to a new way of being that I never asked for and frankly do not want.

Pull up a chair and endure yet another goddamn article about generative AI.

## Gotta blame it on something

In 1989, a musical act called Milli Vanilli had a number one hit titled "Baby Don't Forget My Number." This, along with the earlier single "Girl You Know It's True" secured them a spot on the _Club MTV Tour_. During one of the performances, a technical glitch caused their pre-recorded vocal track to skip and repeat, clearly betraying the fact that they had been lip-syncing to the voices of other singers. It didn't take long before news broke that the performers on the stage that night had never sung _any_ of their music---live or album versions.

In the fallout from this incident, their record label severed ties with them, their Grammy award was rescinded, and their albums were pulled from shelves. The performers{{% margin-note side %}}Fab Morvan and Rob Pilatus{{% /margin-note %}} never found any lasting success after the dissolution of the group. Lawsuits were filed by groups of customers who felt like they were sold fraudulent goods using deceptive practices. To this day, the name Milli Vanilli remains tainted by the scandal.

Maybe it's just me, but I feel that same kind of treachery when somebody tries to pass off a piece of AI-generated work as if it were their own. There's always that moment---whether reading the text, examining the image, or listening to the spoken language---where I clock the presentation as "not quite right." Then the realization hits that I've been engaging with nothing of any particular substance, then I become a little pissed off at having my time and attention wasted by somebody who didn't care enough about what they were doing to actually do that thing.

Recently that feeling of indignation has started becoming displaced by something a bit more melancholy. AI restaurant reviews praising a dish that definitely is not offered on the menu, and the attentive service provided by a named member of the staff who doesn't exist. Video recommendations featuring an algorithmic guess at the swimming motions of a newborn sea otter or the smile of a down-on-his luck war vet reuniting with a service dog. Has anybody with a mouth ever tasted this cookie recipe? Has anybody with an actual butt contributed any of the five-star reviews listed next to this computer chair?

We've got enough content to infinite-scroll for the rest of our waking lives. Yet so much of it is pointless, unnecessary, lacking substance, or actively harmful. It is above all _joyless_---like listening to a Breaking Rust album {{% margin-note %}}There has been plenty of commentary regarding the 100% AI-produced track "Walk My Walk," but there is some real gold in the Singles and EPs category of Breaking Rust's artist page on Spotify. In particular, a relatively recent cover of "Photograph" that answers the question "What if we got Ben E. King's backing band, put a Temu clone of Chris Stapleton's voice on top of it, and did an Ed Sheeran song that went for _eight and a half minutes?_" It is not pleasant and it does not need to exist.<br><br>If that's not to your taste, there's also an eleven minute version of Passenger's "Let Her Go" up there. (Everything okay with your EOS tokens, buddy? Just concerned is all.){{% /margin-note %}} and eating a sleeve of unsalted saltines---while somehow forgetting that it wasn't always this way.

Look at LinkedIn for chrissakes. "A senior engineer was tasked with such-and-such," "The consultant billed for 60 hours," "Our backlog had grown to over a thousand tickets," "When I saw the 350,000 line pull request the junior engineer had opened," and on and on. These are not real things that have happened to living people. They are the result of somebody prompting a chat bot to "make me sound smart and insightful to a room full of people who have long since turned their brains off" while conveying nothing novel or actionable. I have recently started referring to these "thought" "leadership" social media posts collectively as **AIslop's Fables**.

If you'll indulge me, I'd like to take a brief tangent and try my hand at writing one of these ridiculous things myself:

> Two engineers---the systems architect Ass and the solution consultant Weasel---chanced to travel in company down a forest aisle. The Ass walked purposefully several paces ahead of the Weasel, who dawdled merrily along. At last they paused at a fork in the codebase.
>
> The Ass, ever considerate of the broader consequences of his actions, contemplated deeply the choice before him. The Weasel, uninterested in such unrewarding efforts, took rest at the base of a widespreading trie, finding great pleasure in the cool shade of its stable branches.
>
> So offended was the Ass at this display of poor work ethic, he deigned to question the Weasel's technical ability. "How foolish you should be," he brayed, "to remain unbothered by the fact that your house contains one appliance called a washing machine and another called a dishwasher. Until you see the absurdity of it, you have no business designing an API!"
>
> It was in that moment, and all at once, when Jupiter cast down a fierce reallocation of resources that made both of their roles redundant.
> <footer>The AIslopica 001. The Ass and the Weasel</footer>

Anyway. I find that when I mentally filter out all the obvious AI flourishes---the empty fluff, the excessive emoji, the formatting smells, the Ghibli-inspired scenes that really, _really_ love using every available shade of brown---there's sometimes not a whole lot of genuine human connection left in there. And in that empty space, I begin to wonder: Where did all the people go? What are they all doing behind the artifice they're showing here? Why am I wasting my time and energy wading through these shallow yet unbounded seas of _nothing?_

For a while I was able to navigate around it by really curtailing my use of social media. I only looked at LinkedIn for the S-tier trolling of a select group of professional shitposters. Reddit no longer occupied any appreciable amount of my time. There are now entire classes of Hacker News submissions that I refuse to read the comments on.{{% margin-note side %}}Including the comments about this article, should such comments ever materialize.{{% /margin-note %}} I experimented with a small set of browser customizations to eliminate YouTube video recommendations and the site's ill-conceived "Shorts."

In place of all that, I started spending much more time in smaller private communities of people with shared interests, personalities, or life experience. We'd swap links to things we think might be interesting to the group. We wouldn't chase trends, we didn't let ourselves get overloaded with shiny distractions from outside the circle, and we evolved it into a shared space that suited all of us best. Spending time in these small isolated groups really laid bare how _dogshit_ the social landscape on the broader internet felt in comparison.

I was all set to leave that part of my life behind me. Then it followed me to work.

## If a clod be washed away by the sea

There are lots of different jobs out there, and a fair number of them are done on computers. As a matter of fact, when people ask me what I do for a living, I sometimes simply wave my hand and say "Computers" in a kind of no-you-really-don't-want-to-know-what-Kubernetes-is kind of way. I suspect most office workers have a similar aspect of their job that they don't like to dredge up during polite conversation.

I'm a software engineer on paper, and that's the framing I'll use here because it's the one I know best. But I'm sure that those working in design, marketing, visual art, customer service, writing, all sorts of disciplines have felt it too. This ever-louder voice booming from on high to integrate LLMs and other generative AI tools into every conceivable point in your workstream. Maybe against your will. Probably against your own interests.

In the software engineering world, at least until quite recently, we all wrote computer code. Some of us wore the title "Coder" like a badge of honor to describe the profession.{{% margin-note side %}}I never much cared for it.{{% /margin-note %}} We spent basically the entire 2010s loudly promoting "Everyone should learn to code!" as the cure for all of the ails of that era. And coders entered the profession in droves. With a _teeny-tiny_ bit of help from years and years of interests rates near zero, the industry flourished.

There are a bunch of different types of computer code, and one way to visualize the different categories is to imagine them as the different decks on a ship. At the bottom, in the ship's sweltering boiler room, we have the **machine code**---the ones and zeros computers are real good at but humans are real bad at. Above that we have an **assembly language** layer, still cryptic as all hell but at least comprehensible to a skilled and attentive person who subsists entirely on coffee. Above that we have **systems languages** like C and Rust {{% margin-note %}}And maybe Go if you wanna get into fights with certain people.{{% /margin-note %}} that are a pretty good balance between raw control over the computer and ease of getting things done.

One deck higher, we find ourselves among the **interpreted languages** like Python and JavaScipt which hide a whole bunch of underlying concepts away in the name of making the code easier to write and reason about. And yet above that, a whole ecosystem of **low-code** tools that boast a point-and-click interface to building the whole application on top of their hosted platform. These would be things like Framer and Squarespace. Heck, let's throw Excel and Power BI into that pile as well.

In this hierarchy, the upper level languages mechanically generate the code at the layer(s) beneath. If you are working in assembly code, a tool called an **assembler** translates it into machine code without you needing to think about it. If you write C or Rust, a **compiler** takes care of the assembly aspects of the program. Python and JavaScript are executed by **interpreters**, which were each written in a compiled language, and so on. Whichever layer you work in, your code ultimately needs to be translated all the way down to machine code for a computer to make any direct use of it.

What we've got now is perhaps the uppermost deck of that ship: **prompt driven development**. The apparent goal here is to eventually remove all direct manipulation of all types of code, obviating even the pointing and clicking to move different pieces of the app around to suit one's preferences. No, in this paradigm you type out exactly what you want in plain English, and an LLM chews on that prompt for a little while and then writes the necessary code in one of the lower-level languages on your behalf. Don't like what comes out? Prompt it again, and the code will change to something else. Precisely how does it change? It is none of your concern. Same as how when you change a line of Python code, most people really don't get to see what that does at the assembly level either.

There is a key difference here: When you change that line of Python code, you _can_ know what that affects. Every step in the process of executing that code adheres to a rigid set of rules that is followed precisely, each and every time. You _can_ know that extending a string past a certain length triggers a memory allocation, and in this one degenerate case it causes a register spill leading to a performance hitch that can be reliably replicated, tested for, and worked around. It's deeply tedious to trudge through each deck of the ship this way, but it is feasible.

How does an LLM produce its output? Nobody knows. I mean, we _know_ in the abstract sense, but not in a way where we can attribute a certain behavior to a given machine state. It's simply not possible to trace what occurred across the hundreds of billions of parameters that underpin each model and replay even a fraction of the steps that transformed a given piece of context into a specific output token. It's easy to think of this an inherent form of **nondeterminism**, where the output of a system varies based on factors beyond of what was provided as input,{{% margin-note side %}}Compare this with the quote "Insanity is repeating the same mistakes and expecting different results" (which apparently originated in a Narcotics Anonymous pamphlet).{{% /margin-note %}} but it's more attributable to an intentional setting called **temperature**---an intentional introduction of randomness that reduces the likelihood that the model parrots back such a large fragment of training data that it veers into plagiarism territory. Turns out this property has a tendency to break existing code during attempts to make unrelated changes. To defend against that, the industry has turned to **coding agents** that incrementally make these changes in a loop, ideally finding a stable equilibrium where the new thing works and none of the existing things broke. This is pretty much where we are now, with some engineers experimenting with running multiple agents concurrently to observe and correct each other's work.

But you didn't come here for a slapdash and oversimplified explanation of 80 years of programming history. You're here for boat metaphors!

Long time ago, probably before either you or I got into this game, the old RMS _Software Engineering_ struck an iceberg that tore a big gaping hole down the side of her hull. The Machine Code deck flooded first, and like literal rats escaping a literal sinking ship, the machine programmers sought higher ground on the Assembly Language deck. Water began flooding the assembly programmers out, and aside from a few air pockets where the embedded systems programmers sought refuge, everyone hurried up to C deck.

By this point, news had spread that "up near the top" was where everybody wanted to be---although the reasons _why_ got a little lost in the hustle---so a huge number of programmers arrived at the Interpreted Language decks. {{% margin-note %}}This was pretty much where I came in.{{% /margin-note %}} Some hung around for a good fifteen or twenty years, but the rising water waits for nobody. Higher still we climbed, skipping right past the Low-Code mezzanine and straight up to the Prompting promenade on the main deck. It is here that we've reached the top of our game; there's nothing above us but the twinkling stars punctuating the pitch black sky. From here, all the decks below do our bidding. With just a flick of the wrist, huge quantities of lower-level code are willed into existence without intervention. Simply marvelous.

Except... the ship is still taking on water. Sooner or later every deck---including the one the prompters are now standing on---will eventually go under. If you subscribe to the idea that technology will invariably improve and build on top of everything that has come before it, often to the point of completely encapsulating it, why is "writing all that prompt text" such a magical bright red line of job security? Text was the _first thing_ language models ever produced! You really can't envision a future where people think it's quaint and old-timey to write LLM prompts by hand?

And what happens to us in that metaphor? Just chillin', clinging to flotsam, slowly freezing to death in the North Atlantic.

## yolo;dr

Let me be crystal clear: Not everybody wants to write software in paragraph form.

In fact, I might propose the possibility that the techniques emerging today are a totally distinct discipline from traditional software engineering. Perhaps the two might coexist if we could simply agree to stay the hell out of each other's lanes.

But let's be real, that's not how this seems to be going.

At multiple points in my life, I've had the opportunity to debate my peers over the following question: Is software engineering an art, or a science? The science argument is bolstered by the fact that a disheartening proportion of people who work in the industry seem utterly incapable of appreciating art in any capacity, let alone creating any. On the other side, they've had the affirmation "code is poetry" emblazoned on the footer of the WordPress.org site {{% margin-note %}}And to date, the only form of poetry for which MITRE has assigned multiple CVEs.{{% /margin-note %}} for nearly a quarter century. I've long believed---and still believe---that there is a spectrum and things can be both. Look at a cable-stayed bridge, or a Tim Hunkin sculpture, or some of the stupid shit the contestants on _The Great British Baking Show_ have been asked to make over the past couple of seasons, and tell me that these didn't require the unique touch of an artist _and_ an engineer. In the right light, software is no different.

Engineers work in specifications and requirements. The end product needs to behave a certain way, adhere to certain external constraints, meet relevant regulatory criteria, not kill anybody,{{% margin-note side %}}Unless the requirements say it should.{{% /margin-note %}} that type of thing. Artists work in the ambiguous undefined spaces that permeate all the little in-between areas of the work. Somebody has to make the countless tiny decisions that aren't otherwise spelled out in black and white on the ticket. The sum total of all these little decisions becomes something that looks and feels a lot like style, even taste. The choices being made here are influenced by a working lifetime of personal experiences. Perhaps one could go as far as suggesting that it involves a certain intuition to do it well. We're really okay with outsourcing this aspect of our work to some tensor core randomly burping out floating point rounding errors?

There are countless ways to express the same idea. Are some expressions of a particular idea better than others? Arguably!

"But wait," I hear you cry. "Once the product ships, nobody sees the code anyway! Who cares how it looks?" Take a long, hard look around you. Look at your phone. Look at one of the dozens of other web pages you have open. Look at the app launcher on your smart TV. Look at the {{% internal-link et-tu-panera %}}ordering kiosks at Panera{{% /internal-link %}}. Look at every furtive data broker who breached your personal information and offered a $200 credit monitoring voucher{{% margin-note side %}}You never bothered to redeem that, did you?{{% /margin-note %}} as restitution for their negligence. Look at every hateful airline website or clunky automotive touchscreen or inkjet printer driver and tell me with a straight face that code quality doesn't matter---that whatever makes these products so _miserable_ to interact with day in and day out could not _in any way_ be improved by exercising more care in the expression of the underlying code.

Look around you. You don't believe that this could be true?

When I hear people say "I ship code that I don't read," what I hear in my head is "I really do not care about what the end-user of this product experiences, I do not care about whichever poor soul needs to maintain this thing after I've gotten bored with paying attention to it, I do not care about anybody on my team who has to support the ongoing operation of it, and frankly I didn't even care about making it in the first place. I just wanted to be done for the sake of being done." It is a vulgar display of apathy, a willful dereliction of sound engineering practices, and quite frankly it makes the practitioner sound like an insufferable asshat. To wield something so limitlessly powerful as software without so much as the slightest reverence for the craft is simply offensive. Truly. I am viscerally disgusted by what I am watching transpire in this space.

"Aha! I've got you now," you bellow, in a different style of voice for some reason. "This is gatekeeping! You are trying to protect your little clubhouse from outsiders with viewpoints that differ from yours!" Guilty as charged; I am indeed gatekeeping. I'm gatekeeping in the same way all those pesky government officials gatekeep when they tell us we're not allowed to work toward achieving nuclear fission in the shed. Turns out we live in a society, and the actions of one person have the capacity to directly and indirectly affect countless others. If there's an activity that has a high likelihood of causing preventable injury or tying up first responders unnecessarily, those activities tend to get restricted in some way.

Software runs the world. It can make (or lose) untold sums of money. It can decide who gets a favorable mortgage rate or a critical job interview. It can surveil us. It can bombard us with advertisements targeted at personality traits we're not even aware we're revealing. It can cause accidental (or deliberate) death. More commonly, it can really frustrate, annoy, inconvenience, and subtly chip away at the mental well-being of vast swaths of the inhabitants of this planet we all share. Stop treating it like it's anything less.

## I owe my soul to the company store

Not everybody is okay with the idea of becoming dependent on an outside party to do their work.

_Tools._ That's the word that everybody likes to volley around. AI models are tools, the same kind of thing as what I get from Home Depot when I rent a wallpaper steamer. Same as what companies get when they pay Adobe for a Photoshop subscription. Gotta spend money to make money, as the saying goes. "LLM coding agents are tools---nothing more---so just pay for a license seat and use it like you would any other tool."

You ever get the feeling that something is different about the AI case, but you can't quite put your finger on it? You ever say a word like 'couch' out loud too many times, and the sound momentarily loses its meaning? {{% margin-note %}}There's a term for the phenomenon, by the way: semantic satiation.{{% /margin-note %}} Did we all collectively forget precisely what a tool even is?

Suppose there's a slotted-head screw somewhere in your environment that you wish to tighten. You could extend the index finger on your dominant hand, insert the free edge of your nail plate into the slot, and turn your wrist. Depending on the state of the screw, this will probably cause some amount of injury to your fingernail. The mental imagery of that certainly made me cringe a little.

A far more effective technique would be to find a slotted screwdriver, grasp it in your hand, and perform substantially the same motion to accomplish the task. Brains have the rather remarkable ability to treat handheld objects as an extension of the body without a whole lot of cognitive overhead. Both a fingernail and a screwdriver permit a being of free will to impart some change in their environment. Both the fingernail and the screwdriver are pretty unambiguously tools.

The elegant simplicity of the screwdriver makes it useful for more than just driving screws. One could---in a pinch---use a screwdriver to pry two pieces apart, or to shave a piece of wood or other malleable material down, or one could bring it down to the mess hall to finally shank Jimmy the Rat. Whatever a person might want to do with a hand-held object having a screwdriver's material properties, they are free to do it.

Somewhere in another part of town, on the fourth floor of a three-star chain hotel, an ice machine hums dutifully in the elevator lobby. This is a self-contained appliance that draws utility power and water from the building and converts it into ice cubes.{{% margin-note side %}}Along with noise and waste heat.{{% /margin-note %}} That's all it does, all day every day, whether anyone is paying attention to it or not. Is the ice machine a tool? Is it being directly manipulated by a being of sapience to achieve a particular end result? Or is it simply a machine, just "there" in case somebody desires its convenience?

Conceptually between these two objects, we have the power screwdriver. This is a handheld device that converts electrical power into torque{{% margin-note side %}}Along with noise and waste heat.{{% /margin-note %}} that turns a slotted bit. The operator manipulates this in a way that's not too different from the regular screwdriver, moving it around and positioning the bit in the screw head, but instead of doing the difficult work of twisting their wrist to move the screw, all they need to do is press a button to release stored energy and channel it into the act of turning. {{% margin-note %}}They also need to know when to _release_ the button, a lesson that comes from years of stripped threads, cammed-out heads, and splintered wood.{{% /margin-note %}} This is a far more efficient way to drive screws. It allows more screws to be driven over a given span of time, and it conserves the operator's energy and really saves their wrist from long-term injury.

Yet in removing the most laborious and time-consuming part of turning screws, the power screwdriver has lost some of the generality that the regular screwdriver enjoyed. Its awkward form factor and stubby bit/chuck arrangement prevents it from being useful at prying or chiseling, and it's definitely not an effective way to deal with our pesky cellmate.

In fact, the narrow specialization of the power screwdriver is part of the reason why regular screwdrivers still exist. I would guess that almost every person with a power screwdriver in their garage also has _multiple_ regular screwdrivers too. They each have their time and their place. I would not use a power screwdriver to change a watch battery, and I would not use a regular screwdriver to mount a 65-inch TV to a pair of wall studs. Both of these items are in my toolbox; I see no difficulty calling both of them tools.

So, what is generative AI? Is it a power screwdriver that removes sporadic moments of fleeting agony from a much larger home improvement project? Is it an ice machine loudly grinding unrequested ice cubes onto the tile floor at two o'clock in the morning? Or is it a stick of dynamite---light the fuse, plug your ears, and run the hell away from whatever happens next?

It can be all of these things, it seems. I guess AI really does satisfy the definition of a tool as long as it's being used as one.

This unlocks a common refrain from the booster class: "A true craftsperson uses every tool at their disposal!" Which, if you think about it for more than three seconds, is ridiculous on its face. Gotta dig some holes for fence posts? Okay! Bring along every shovel on the truck, the Ditch Witch, a box of ANFO and the Bagger 293. Have the people who echo this kind of stuff ever built _anything_ in the physical world? A true craftsperson has one _real good_ compound miter saw that they use for basically every cut on the job. They'll use it until it breaks down, then they'll replace it with a newer model of substantially the same thing. {{% margin-note %}}You know why they stick with what they know? _Because they know it._ They've invested a lot of effort learning quirks, shortcuts, and building up muscle memory on it.{{% /margin-note %}} In what world is constantly switching tools for the sake of switching tools a remotely smart use of time?

But there's a deeper theme I wanted to touch on here. There's a random piece of advice that's been floating around my head for years: _Don't rent your livelihood._{{% margin-note side %}}I wish I knew where I picked this up from so I could properly attribute the source, but my research so far has turned up nothing.{{% /margin-note %}} That is to say, if there is a tool or system on which your entire professional success rests, do everything you can to ensure that it's not something you need to constantly pay other people to acquire. For example, if you own and operate a moving company, it would be wise to not need to rely on a rental company to provide a truck for you to use every day. Such reliance effectively puts you entirely at the rental company's mercy. If they want to jack up their day rates, that hurts your bottom line. If you show up the morning before a big move and they already rented all their trucks out to other customers, your entire operation stops cold.

Obviously there is nuance to it. If you're a landscaping company and you only need the Ditch Witch on certain days, it's less risky and more fiscally responsible to rent that. If you can't get it, it's not like the business shuts down. I'm talking about the fundamental everyday stuff here: the plumber's wrenches, the musician's cello, the photographer's camera bodies.

Paying for AI of any kind feels like something between outsourcing the work and renting a brain. Neither one is a particularly great feeling, at least to me. The outsourcing aspect is pretty clear-cut: If you are doing this as an employee, the company hired _you_ and everything you bring to the table---your judgement, your experience, your personality, etc. If you wouldn't have commissioned some dude off Fiverr to do your job for you in 2021, what suddenly changed now? Even if the business paid for the license on your behalf, does it really change the fact that _it ain't really you doing that work anymore?_ What do they even need you for, anyway?

The rent-a-brain aspect is more acutely alarming. And I will be blunt here: It sure does seem like the prolonged use of LLMs can reliably turn a person's mind into mush. Perhaps there's a bit of a correlation/causation aspect, but I do not like what I see out there.

Stop me if you've heard this one before: "After [however long] using AI coding assistants, there's no way I'm going back!" You know, I don't doubt that this is true. Because I'm not sure some of the people who say this _could_ go back. It reads like praise on the surface, but those same words betray a chilling sense of dependence. "I gambled away my life savings, I can't stop now." "I'm now addicted to heroin, why would I give that up?" "I lost a piece of myself that I can't even remember ever having, adapt or get left behind! :rocket:" Do you actually want to be in a place where you feel you can no longer escape?

If you do knowledge work, your brain is your livelihood. Don't rent your brain from some third party, especially a third party that doesn't have your best interests at heart. How much do you suppose these LLM tokens actually cost, once you factor in the amortized expense of training multiple models over all the content that has ever been exposed to the internet? What does it cost once the VC firm needs to see a return on their investment, or the financing deals come due, or the investor class gets spooked and somebody's share price tanks? How much will you need to pay each month to rent your livelihood back from these companies once their offerings aren't so heavily subsidized and your brain has completely atrophied? What will you do when the frontier models start inserting "sponsored thoughts" into the work you tasked them with?

We live in a _capitalist_ society. The line must go up at all costs. For a while this was easy in the technology space because computers kept getting more capable. Finally, we can do color! This one can play CD-ROMs! Now this one can run the hottest new game! It streams online videos!{{% margin-note side %}}Barely.{{% /margin-note %}} You ever notice how that kinda petered out over a decade ago? Computers today feel pretty much like the computers did in 2016. We stopped seeing worthwhile advances in features that anybody was clamoring for. VR was a bit of a dud in consumer circles, cryptocurrency didn't meaningfully change much of anything, and the sole motivating factor for me buying my last three smartphones was "the new one isn't running out of storage space and the battery works."

I doubt anybody really wants to face this fact, but technology today is in a terrible slump. The industry desperately needs something---anything---to entice that almighty line to go up. If AI can't do it, there aren't a whole lot of other things out there to be optimistic toward right now. Web3 didn't work. The Metaverse turned into an apparently obscure multi-player game called _Horizon Worlds_.{{% margin-note side %}}Did you know? I didn't.{{% /margin-note %}} We've already built all the unregulated taxi companies{{% margin-note side %}}Lyft, Uber{{% /margin-note %}} and illegal hotel conversions.{{% margin-note side %}}Airbnb, Vrbo{{% /margin-note %}} None of humanity's actual problems appear sexy (or tractable) enough for the industry to concern itself with. So this is what we've got. AI is the one basket into which we have feverishly dumped hundreds of billions of dollars worth of our eggs.

And best of luck to us with all that.

## Nothing for money

A single DGX B200 AI server is rated to consume 14,300 watts of electrical energy at peak. You can cram about four of these on a rack if you like to live on the edge, so these four units might draw somewhere in the neighborhood of 200 amps of current combined. For a point of comparison, a typical single-family home in the United States will have wires from the power company that are thick enough to provide a 200 amp service. {{% margin-note %}}And much like a single-family home, each of these servers costs a couple hundred thousand dollars.{{% /margin-note %}} Your average datacenter will contain one or two dozen of these racks along each of its aisles, with aisles spaced about every ten feet or so, filling up a floor area that dwarfs the warehouse at the end of _Raiders of the Lost Ark_. Such datacenters are sprouting up in cities all across the globe, as fast as companies are able to pay for them.{{% margin-note side %}}Just kidding. They're going up _faster_ than companies can pay for them.{{% /margin-note %}}

As far as the physical world is concerned, computers don't really do anything useful. They don't move around, they don't produce much light, there are no important chemical reactions occurring inside, and they're specifically engineered not to emit strong radio waves or electromagnetic fields. The only thing they can really do with the electrical energy they consume is convert it into heat. So they do. Most of the 14.3 kW taken from utility power is converted to heat, with the number-crunching stuff as its byproduct. {{% margin-note %}}A typical household space heater might be rated at 1.5 kW. Each server dissipates _ten times_ that amount.{{% /margin-note %}} These things are _belching_ heat into their surroundings.

Each machine is packed with ventilation fans that generate sound pressure levels well over 90 decibels---substantially louder than a vacuum cleaner. An aisle full of AI servers is so deafening that even wearing earplugs underneath earmuffs is not sufficient to protect against permanent hearing damage. To keep the servers from baking themselves, huge industrial-scale air conditioning systems pump the heat away and dump it into the ambient air outside the building. When people raise concerns about datacenters depleting local water supplies, this is where that water is going: The air conditioning systems apply the heat to the water, which causes the water to evaporate into the atmosphere. {{% margin-note %}}See, they're not _using_ water, they're merely _converting_ it into clouds. Which then causes rain. Which either falls on the ocean so we can't easily use that water again, or it falls on another part of the country as catastrophic flooding. Totally renewable, don't worry about it.{{% /margin-note %}} The evaporated water carries the heat away, and what's left on the ground is cooled as a result. This cooling process uses yet more electricity.

A six-inch Spicy Italian Sub from Subway contains sufficient caloric content to run a person's 20-watt brain for 24 hours.

I wouldn't consider myself to be somebody you should be turning to if you're looking for environmental insights. Global energy production and consumption is a whole big thing and frankly I'm probably better off moodwise knowing as little about it as I am practically able to. I will say that it is _probably_ a net negative that AI datacenters use as much power as they do, and it's _probably_ in everybody's best interest to get that power consumption to go down even if it results in a net decrease in throughput and worse latency.

What I do feel qualified to comment on is the increase of **entropy** caused by running these systems. I mean this in more than the strict scientific sense of releasing heat into the environment. I'm also talking about the material that is generated as the stated goal of the whole process---the _generative_ part of GenAI. The text and computer code, the images, the videos---these are increasing the entropy of the internet, its social spaces, and our own finite attention. As much heat as they're venting into the air, at least that much "content" permeates our screens and headphones at the same time.

Not everybody is okay with that.

It may or may not surprise you, but I never got into the 3D printing hobby. Don't get me wrong, it's an impressive technology and an undeniable boon to tinkerers and professional prototypers alike. My position on it has always been rather pragmatic: I've got too much crap in my living spaces---more crap than I have places to put it or the ambition to organize it---so why on earth would I want to own a machine whose sole purpose was to _make more crap?_

One doesn't need to take too many mental leaps to draw a parallel between generative AI and 3D printing. You want it, you can have it. It's pretty cheap, and it doesn't take anywhere near as long as trying to find somebody to make it for you using the old techniques. If it comes out deformed, throw it away and try again. Nobody put any substantial effort into making it, so it's not like you're hurting anybody's feelings by discarding it. As soon as a new design leaves the machine and you take possession of it, you're holding the only instance of a brand new thing, a bespoke build just for you. That should make you feel... something, right?

"When you get something for free, it has no value." This line has been spoken---on more than one occasion---by Adam Levy, son of Judge Judy Sheindlin, on the reality court show _Tribunal Justice_.{{% margin-note side %}}The fact that he made this statement on a free TV show streaming through an app called Freevee is an irony not lost on me.{{% /margin-note %}} In the original context, he was referring to an animal that the defendant gave away for free which later had medical expenses that the plaintiff wanted to recover. I think about his quote a lot.

We've got a technology here that can produce basically anything that can be represented symbolically---written and spoken language, music, images, video---along with any information that can be encoded in one of those mediums. {{% margin-note %}}If it weren't for limitations in human-computer interfaces, there's no reason it couldn't generate scents and flavors as well.{{% /margin-note %}} The price for any of these outputs is, well, whatever AI training and inference goes for these days. It's certainly cheaper than actually staging a video shoot or bugging your friend to serenade you with a guitar or mustering up the mental stamina to write a four-sentence email to your boss or finally learn which order the arguments to the `ln` command go in. {{% margin-note %}}If this is something you regularly struggle with, I'm gonna blow your mind. `ln` works the same as `cp`:<br>`cp WhereItIs WhereYouWantIt`<br>`ln -s WhereItIs WhereYouWantIt`{{% /margin-note %}} So why do the difficult, expensive, time-consuming thing when you could just do the cheap AI thing? In fact, why do anything at all?

I will concede that it is frankly incredible that we have gotten so close to empirically testing the infinite monkey theorem, and I don't mean that sardonically. It is a miracle of human ingenuity that we can etch 100 billion transistors onto a piece of rock we dug out of the ground. The fact that we don't really understand how it works, yet it _does_ work, is astonishing. It's frighteningly good at search and retrieval. This stuff is capable of doing some genuinely cool stuff that might actually set us up for untold prosperity for generations to come. But if we're just going to use it to make another Stable Diffusion image of a smooth beige coffee shop or a commit message peppered with green checkbox emoji describing what the code "appears" to do{{% margin-note side %}}"This pull request appears to..." _Appears_ to? You wrote it, my guy!{{% /margin-note %}}---all in the hopes that it will make us all a lot of money someday, somehow---just put that rock back where you found it.

We live in a society with other people, and as much as it might be an annoyance sometimes, those other people deserve to enjoy a certain amount of dignity and respect. You've got family, coworkers, friends, neighbors; your life is a complex web of social interconnections. You are well within your rights to open your address book, your email archive, your photos and videos up to third-party services to help you manage your life... but did you ever bother to ask if the people represented in that shared content were okay with you sharing it? Maybe your good friend doesn't want their name/address/phone number to be given away so hastily. Maybe your coworker would've written that off-the-cuff text message a little differently if they knew you were going to ship it off somewhere. Maybe you've got a family member who thinks it's downright creepy that there's a timestamped image of their face along with GPS coordinates nestled away in the EXIF data floating around out there somewhere, just because you snapped an innocent photo at their party and then freely gave it to an amoral technology company. Hooray, you've built a digital assistant to help organize your calendar, and now it sees that I responded 'yes' to the invitation to be in a place at a time to do a thing. Why does it need to know that? May I politely ask you to stop letting it know that without my consenting to it?

"In order to truly serve you, these systems need to know all there is to know about you." It's like we somehow forgot how to view things through a lens of suspicion.

Now, let me just nip this one in the bud: I'm going to fucking keelhaul the next person who calls me a Luddite for feeling this way. I'm not arguing that this technology should be unilaterally destroyed; I am arguing that we are collectively using it in the dumbest possible way, causing the most self-inflicted injury, and maximizing the amount of angst and suffering we'll all have to contend with. I am angry at generative AI because it seems to be making everybody think and act like complete idiots.

But if you wanna talk Luddites, here's something to chew on. The Luddites were textile workers who opposed the introduction of machinery that automated what had traditionally been the tedious process of hand-finishing cloth. They didn't enjoy the tedium _per se_; what they liked was the ability to earn a livable wage by _enduring_ that tedium. Part of their argument was, although the machines were touted as being able to do the same job quicker and cheaper, the end product was of inferior quality due to the lack of skilled attention given to the work. They might've said that quality was something worth paying a little more and waiting a little longer for. {{% margin-note %}}I happen to agree with that, but it doesn't mean I'm going to get all smashy about it.{{% /margin-note %}}

I bet that somewhere in your closet or dresser you've got a shirt that you don't wear anymore. Maybe it was nice when you bought it, but after one or two washes it started to pill, or it faded, or some of the stitching began to unravel. If it looked nicer, maybe you'd donate it to a thrift store. Then again, if it looked nicer you'd still be wearing it regularly. Maybe you should just throw it out; it's not even the kind of fabric that's good to wash your car with. You're not even mad about it really, considering how cheap it was. Do you ever wonder if, had the Luddites not failed, we'd be so awash in cheap garbage clothing today?

Is anybody else tired of living in a world filled with abject crap?

## TODO

Toby made his first chair when he was twelve years old. It was built from scraps he found behind the barn, some weathered 2x4s and the remnants of a card table. It was a boxy kind of thing, no armrests, and not a single curved surface anywhere on it. But the cuts were square, the pieces fit together good, and it felt like something that might last for a while. He never cared much about the finish, never sanded any of the surfaces, he slathered it in Rust-Oleum red and put it into service at the desk where he did his homework.

He made another a few weeks later, and gave that one to his granddad as a gift. Pretty much the same design, same color, although this one was a little taller to better suit his grandfather's towering stature. Then he made another one for his friend to sit in when they hung out.

In the years since then, Toby's made more chairs than he can even recall. It may very well be over a thousand at this point. He's got a whole workshop with a few staff helping him out. And they've branched out into other stuff too---end tables and three-shelf bookcases, those kinds of things. Toby's shop has enjoyed a modest amount of regional attention and there's been plenty of orders to keep his crew busy.

He was recently interviewed by a student for the middle school's newspaper. Toby loved talking about his work---evidenced by the joyful smile peeking through his bushy salt-and-pepper beard---and he loved inspiring kids to set ambitious goals in their own lives. When asked how he got to where he is, he replied simply: "Every day that I come in here and pick up my tools, I have the opportunity to grant somebody in the world a nice place to sit." He actually had to say it twice; the student was not the fastest with a pen and pad.

Across the shop, Lyle looked up just in time to catch Toby's quote. He had just finished clamping a long wooden dowel into his well-worn lathe and was now hunting around his cluttered bench top for his safety glasses. He bristled slightly at the words his boss was essentially dictating to the kid. This is a wood shop; they make chairs. Ain't nothing lofty or aspirational about that.

Lyle slipped the glasses over his eyes and flipped the switch on his lathe. The dowel came up to speed rapidly as the din of motor noise surrounded him like an old familiar friend. He picked up his favorite chisel and set to work. Back and forth along the length of the piece, sending swarf and chips of wood fluttering to the shop floor, he molded a raw piece of wood into one spindle. He switched the machine off and lifted his glasses to rest above his forehead. The spinning blur of the workpiece slowed, then stopped, and he unclamped it. In its place, a brand new dowel from a small stack. The chair being created here needed nine spindles in total, but he wasn't counting them. It'd be done whenever the stack ran out.

Outside of his day job, Lyle's biggest problem was that he never finished anything. He also never really started anything, either. His garage was filled with clutter---raw materials for projects he thought he wanted to try, scraps of half-cut materials he "might need" for another job, a pile of experimental and practice cuts, and the occasional assembled piece brought 90% of the way to completion and then left to languish under spiderwebs and dust. He had a tendency to only pick up things that allowed him to work with the lathe. Once the task progressed past the point of needing lathe work, his ambition for continuing dropped tremendously. He had at one time semi-seriously considered going into business for himself making custom baseball bats, but the closest potential customer was a low-A ball club about 100 miles away that he never actually worked up the wherewithal to contact. He never actually wanted that for himself; society told him that he was supposed to want that.

In the five or so years he'd worked at the shop, Lyle never really had any lengthy or deep conversions with Toby. They had always been cordial enough---how's the family, have you ever been camping, can you believe our team bungled the playoff game---those types of conversations. But nothing much deeper than that. Lyle had always respected Toby and the way he chose to run the business, but he never really wanted to get too into the weeds talking about orders and customer success and _vision_. That kind of stuff required way too much time talking on the phone for Lyle's taste. It was frankly better for everybody that Lyle stay back behind the lathe, churning out chair spindles, table legs, even the occasional baluster. It was all the same from where he sat.

One of Toby's earliest realizations during the early days of the business was that, although he was skilled enough at every aspect of furniture making to do everything himself, he wasn't passionate about most of the low-level aspects of the work. He'd barely been in business for two months when he hired Beau to take over sanding and finishing---Toby's least favorite task of them all. Janice was hired to do shipping and receiving, another one of those jobs that he couldn't stand sacrificing his attention to. Lyle was probably the fourth or fifth hire once production really started picking up. The lathe was his specialty; he never wanted anything more than that.

Toby remained the idea guy. The designer of the various product lines, the head of sales, the one-man public relations department and the self-proclaimed visionary of the whole thing. He was always full of big ideas and big plans, and they all involved a world filled with handcrafted furniture with his name scorched on the underside with a hot iron. Toby made furniture for people, goddammit.

As far as Lyle was concerned, Toby was a bit of a pompous, self-aggrandizing windbag. His wood shop made chairs, not cancer cures. Still, it was a pretty good gig for this small town on the Appalachian side of the Rust Belt, and the work suited him. All he ever wanted in life was to gradually shape wood into axially symmetric curves and forms. It was the closest thing he ever had to feeling like he had a purpose on this earth. He never even cared for a minute about what all those finished pieces ended up in. He just loved using the lathe, and he was damn good at it. Lyle was born to be a woodturner, goddammit.

Not everybody views shipping products as their core value.

Here we come perhaps to the meat of why everybody seems to think everybody else is some kind of fool. People have certain core values---sometimes held subconsciously---and these can seem utterly alien to others who don't share them. I'm starting to believe that a sizable chunk of the arguments about AI use (and probably a bunch of other things) boils down to people forming opinions and preferences from a set of values and principles that are incompatible with those held by the other party.

Put simply, Toby values shipping things and providing value to the world, and Lyle doesn't. Lyle values deep expertise in a skill carried out with care and craft, and Toby doesn't. Toby's ultimate dream, beyond the whole furniture thing, is to eventually make enough money---having never really settled on what nebulous sum of money constitutes "enough" for him---that he can retire into peace. Lyle wants to keep doing what he does until his body finally gives out, then continue doing it for a little while longer. Any discussion that the two of them might have that brings these two sets of values into tension is going to end up in some kind of argument that neither one side will concede. And who would expect them to? These are the very foundations of their personalities.

This, right here, is why everybody is fighting all the time. We're all trying to argue positions based on mismatched values. Not _wrong_ values. Mismatched.

On the one side, you've got folks whose entire sense of self-worth and meaning is inexorably tied to the act of generating economic value. Economies being what they are, that economic value is enjoyed by one or more outside parties. In the other corner, you've got people who aren't primarily focused on creating anything of any appreciable value for others and who are motivated instead by some internal force. Perhaps these people would be more likely to be viewed as selfish or childish for putting their own interests first. Any economic value that the latter group manages to produce is either a byproduct of that internal force or just a straight-up accident.

Neither of these is _wrong_.{{% margin-note side %}}Although the former certainly fits into capitalism's mold a lot more readily.{{% /margin-note %}} They are simply _different_.

When we visit sites like the LinkedIns or the Hackers News, we're stepping into environments that are already heavily and disproportionately skewed toward the "generate economic value" side. LinkedIn is a place for cosplaying as a character who might be wise or insightful about business and that swole grindset hustle, and Hacker News is an echo chamber for technology fans who deliberately inserted themselves into orbit around a startup accelerator.{{% margin-note side %}}Y Combinator{{% /margin-note %}}

It's no wonder why a person in the "do what I like" camp might feel outnumbered in spaces like those. It's not surprising that voicing an opinion that runs counter to the broad themes of "generate economic value" would sow discord. It doesn't mean anybody is wrong per se, but it does mean that somebody needs to at least try to point to the reason why this keeps happening.

Having said that, as a proud citizen of the "do what I like" tribe, I do feel qualified to point out exactly what bothers _me_ about the other side's talking points. Feel free to take it or leave it.

You ever notice how the big selling point of AI tools is how much more productive it makes everybody? "Saves time," "Lets me do 10x what I did before," "I can work on five different things simultaneously," and so forth. I'm skeptical of the exact numbers---especially that 10x figure---but I'm broadly convinced that the use of AI is actually making some people faster at certain tasks. Sometimes in a moment of vulnerable transparency you'll hear things like "It makes me more tired than I used to be at the end of the day." Sign me up. /s

You know what I never hear in these discussions? "It makes me _happier_." "It gives me a sense of _fulfillment_ and _meaning_." "It has provided me with _higher income_ or a _shorter workday_." "I am finally _respected_." You'd think that if somebody attained these, that would get top billing over some olive-drab tripe about productivity... right? Or am I just supposed to take it as implied that productivity naturally and inevitably leads to all those other good things, and we all know this, so why should it need to be stated explicitly?

I dunno, man. Sounds kinda like B.S. to me.

---

- i could've felled this tree with a chainsaw, but i didn't -- and that's the point
- sometimes the meaningless puzzles are important (now i gotta reevaluate blockchain)
- even mechanically renaming things trains you to name them right in the first place
- i can beat Usain Bolt if i run the 100m in a car

- it goes the other way too
    - folks who spend their days installing oh-my-zsh plugins and reinstalling Linux
- companies who prioritize shipping at all cost are going to grind you to dust
    - when they say they value your professional growth -- do they?
    - or do they just want to say a magic spell to make you luckier at LLM slot machines?

- wow, look at how many LoC this thing spat out! i thought we outgrew this

- so is the product important, or the code?
    - code is a liability, something for the machine to do, something we don't value
    - we don't even read it! throw it away and make something new if it doesn't work
    - but the code is proprietary and secret, and must never leak
    - the loud drumbeat is "build, build, build!" these structures
        - one loose wire nut or sloppy nail piercing insulation gets you a structure fire
    - https://darioamodei.com/essay/machines-of-loving-grace
        - he wants us to be a bunch of grad students in the shadow of a computer
    - is it even copyrightable?
- distorted corporate memphis linkedin GIF
- making ideas expensive helps filter out the bad ideas
